The commands to configure a router to be a DNS Client.
The reason you would do this is if you want the router itself to be able to resolve FQDNs.
So, for example, from the router, maybe you want to ping LinuxA from there. Then you would need
to set it up as a DNS Client.
Now, you don't need to set the router up as a DNS Client for DNS traffic to pass through it.
This is only if you need the router itself to be able to resolve FQDNs to hostnames.
So often, we won't do that. Often, when we're working on a router, we're always going to be working with
IP addresses.
But if you did want it to be able to resolve hostnames, the commands to enter are 'ip domain-lookup',
to allow it to look up a DNS server; 'ip name-server', and then the IP address of your DNS server; 'ip domain-name,
and then the primary domain name; and if you want it to also lookup additional DNS suffixes,
'ip domain-list', and then those additional suffixes.
Okay, so that's how you configure it to be a DNS Client. If you wanted a router to be your DNS Server,
then to configure that, you would enter those same commands plus 'ip dns server' is the command that
configure it as a DNS server, and then you would need to enter address records for everything that
you want it to be able to resolve. The command for that is 'ip host', and then the hostname and the IP address
of that host.
Now, you will not usually want a Cisco router to be a DNS server.
Usually, you would use an external Windows, or Unix or Linux server to do that, but it is capable of
doing it.
Okay,
those were the commands.
Let's configure that in the lab next.
We'll have to look at the lab topology first.
You can see I've got three routers, R1, R2, and R3. R1 has got IP address 10.10.10.1.
R2 is 10.10.10.2, and it's also got an interface of 10.10.20.2.
R3 is at 10.10.20.1. I'm going to configure R3 as the DNS Server,
and I'm going to configure entries for all three routers on there, so it will be able to resolve them, and then
we'll configure R1 as the DNS Client.
Okay, so I've got a window open for both routers. Let's configure the DNS Server first,
which was R3.
I'll do a 'show IP interface brief' just to check the IP address is right on there.
10.10.20.1,
that's going to be our DNS Server.
So the commands I'll enter, first up, 'ip domain-lookup' to enable it to use DNS.
Oh, and I forgot to go to global configuration, so 'config t' first to get to global configuration, and then
'ip domain-lookup' should work.
Next up is 'ip name-server' to configure where the DNS server is going to be.
It's going to be itself, which is at 10.10.20.1.
Then, I'll configure the domain name, so 'ip domain-name',
and for this lab, I'll use flackbox.lab.
Obviously, this is a different lab than the one I showed you with Windows because I'm doing it on my
Cisco router now,
and then the command to make this the DNS server is 'ip dns server'.
So, that's my basic DNS commands.
Next up, I need to enter addresses for the host that I want to resolve.
So, the command for that is 'ip host'. The first one is R1, which is at 10.10.10.1.
Then next will be R2,
I'll use command history for this, so I'll hit the up arrow to get that previous command back, and I'm going
to edit this using the cursor keys to make it 'ip host R2'
is at 10.10.10.2. Then the up arrow again, the next host is R3, and that is at
10.10.20.1.
So, that's how you do your hosts. I'll also enter these as FQDNs as well. To show you how to do that,
so 'ip host R1.flackbox.lab' is at 10.10.10.1, and then R2 is at
10.10.10.2.
So I just used the up arrow again there, and I'll
edit this and make that 'R2.flackbox.lab' and the correct IP address. And then the last one,
'ip host R3.flackbox.lab', is at 10.10.20.1. So, that's all the configurations
that I need for my DNS Server.
Next up, let's configure R1 to be a DNS Client.
So I'll go in here, I'll go to global configuration, and then 'ip domain-lookup' to allow it to use
a DNS Server. Then 'ip name-server' to configure where the DNS server is,
that's on R3, which is at 10.10.20.1, and then the DNS suffix, I'll say 'ip domain-list
flackbox.lab', and now I'll use 'end' to drop back down to the enable prompt.
Let's see if I can resolve hostnames now on R1. So I will try pinging R3 by its hostname, and I can
see it's resolving it at the Domain Server at 10.10.20.1. It then resolved that, and I can see that
the success rate was 5 out of 5, so that looks all good.
Let's also try pinging R2.
This will also be resolved by the DNS Server at 10.10.20.1, and it resolved that to
10.10.10.2, and I was able to ping that too. So, that's how you configure DNS
on your Cisco routers.
Next up, we'll have a look at ARP
in the next lecture.